video is brought to you by Squarespace
the all-in-one website building platform
to bring your business to life and
succeed online all in one place and all
on your
[Music]
terms earlier this year I released a
video on the artwork of redius varrow an
artist renowned for her mystical and
other worldly surrealist art that she
produced during the early to mid 20th
century born in Spain and enduring many
hardships within Europe brought on by
War and poverty she eventually fled
Europe to seek refuge in Mexico where
her art truly began to
flourish however she would not be the
only artist within the surrealist
movement of the 1930s who would seek
asylum in Mexico in fact the artists
will be looking at today not only shares
a relatively similar background to
varrow but many have considered a style
of art to be striking L similar as well
the artist I'm referring to is Leonora
Carrington a British born surrealist
painter and novelist who today is still
regarded as one of the leading
influencers during this crucial movement
in art history her work is famous and
recognizable for being both dreamlike
and mysterious often featuring
Fantastical creatures and surreal
Landscapes often inspired by the fears
anxieties and Nightmares she experienced
during her youth whilst growing up in a
Neo Gothic mansion in Lancashire England
she also wrote several novels and short
stories which explore themes of identity
and the power of the
subconscious some of you out there have
requested that I cover Leonora
Carrington for a while now so I thought
I'd make my last video of a year based
on a magical and strange artwork in this
video we're going to be briefly
exploring the life and story of
Carrington as well as taking a good look
at some of her most noteworthy
masterpiece pieces don't forget to
subscribe and hit the notification Bell
to see more videos from me on the weird
and wonderful side of the art world and
with that said welcome to another video
everyone and welcome to the wonderfully
strange art of Leonora
Carrington Mary Leonora Carrington was
born born at Westwood House in Clayton
Green in Lancashire England on April 6th
1917 she was a daughter of a wealthy
textile industrialist and her upbringing
was marked by a blend of privilege and
conventionality her family were Roman
Catholic and Incredibly strict often she
was privately educated by various
governesses cheaters and nuns growing up
in a grand Gothic Revival mansion in
Cocker room named CR Hall a place that
would greatly influence Her Imagination
and creative style in her later
artworks however from an early age
Carrington exhibited a rebellious and
imaginative spirit that would shape her
life and artistic career in her youth
Carrington defied societal expectations
for young women of her social class she
rejected formal education and instead
pursued art enrolling at the Chelsea
School of Art in London there should
became friends with fellow surrealist
Max Ernst who would later become her
lover and greatly influence her artistic
development however after they had moved
to France the outbreak of World War II
disrupted their relationship as Ernst
was German and deemed by the French
authorities to be quote a hostile alien
and so he was quickly
arrested only to be arrested again later
by the Gusto when Germany invaded France
because art was considered by the Nazis
to be quote degenerate after that
despite Carrington suffering from
terrible heartbreak and a mental
breakdown from their forc separation she
and erns never continued their
relationship in the decades that
followed his release from prison fleeing
the war and a restrictive environment of
her family Carrington moved to New York
City in
1940 in the United States she became
part of a vibrant surrealist community
and and continued to develop her unique
artistic style Caron's paintings often
featured mythical and Fantastical
elements drawing inspiration from her
interest in mythology Alchemy and the
Occult after the war Carrington settled
in Mexico where she would spend the
majority of her life Mexico became a
profound influence on her work and she
integrated local folklore and Indigenous
themes into her art her paintings are
characterized by elusive Landscapes
mythical creatures and symbolic imagery
apart from her contributions to the
visual arts Leonora Carrington was a
talented writer and her writing much
like her paintings delved Into The
Surreal and she often explored themes of
transformation identity and the
mystical Leonor Carrington's Legacy as a
surrealist artist and writer has gained
increasing recognition over the years
her work has been exhibited in
internationally and she is celebrated
for her role in challenging the
conventions of both society and the art
World Caron's life and art continued to
inspire those who appreciate the power
of imagination and the freedom to
express oneself Beyond societal
constraints she passed away on May 25th
2011 leaving behind a rich body of work
that continues to Captivate audiences
and influence contemporary artists
[Music]
one iconic painting of Carrington's that
always seems to come to my mind is named
the meal of Lord Candlestick completed
in
1938 this bizarre scene with an equally
bizarre title is a painting that
explores themes of rebellion subversion
and the height of Carrington's extraord
orary
imagination it depicts a chaotic and
somewhat grotesque scene of a family of
female creatures gathered around a
dining table engaged in an unsettling
ritualistic looking Feast Carrington's
use of symbolism distorted figures and a
dreamlike atmosphere creates a powerful
and evocative commentary on the
oppressive forces of Conformity and the
raw desire to break free from some kind
of societal prison that she often found
self in the painting's title the meal of
Lord Candlestick is a direct reference
to Carrington's father whom she
nicknamed Lord Candlestick due to his
overbearing and controlling nature
considering that Carrington completed
this painting shortly after she left
England and during the beginning of her
affair with Max erst is widely believed
that this painting serves as a sort of
mockery and rejection of a strict
Catholic upbringing the dining table a
representation of the one used at the
great Banquet Hall in a parents estate
of crookie Hall is transformed into an
altar upon which a maard feast is being
consumed the figures gathered around the
table are distorted with phallic necks
and contorted faces the food itself
ranges from strange to straight up
repulsive consisting of mostly live
animals and what even appears to be an
infant that the figure at the head of a
t table is about to
devour Caron's use of color and texture
further enhances the painting's
unsettling atmosphere the stark contrast
between the dark and oppressive colors
and the bright garish colors of the
objects creates a scene of
disorientation and
unease this painting is currently in a
private collection and there's very
little additional information
surrounding the symbolisms included in
this painting despite there been many to
choose from in this piece but it seems
clear that given what is documented what
we know of Caron's childhood and given
the time period in which it was
completed in that this painting
represents a sort of emotional closure
to our upbringing and a subsequent
escape from it there's a high
possibility of a child being consumed on
the table could be a representation of
herself someone who feels small innocent
and helpless in the midst of a chaotic
and dismissive family that only seems to
take from
her next we have Leonora Carrington's
portrait of Max Stern painted in
1939 the portrait captures the essence
of Carrington's relationship with the
fellow surrealist artist while
simultaneously transcending the
boundaries of conventional portraiture
the painting exudes another worldly
atmosphere with erns depicted as a
commanding towering figure placed
against a backdrop of a cold mountainous
and alien looking landscape a world
which could be symbolic of the feelings
Caron experienced while living with
Ernst in occupied
France Ernst is wearing a wooly
feather-like red gown that Trails down
to the shape of a fish-like tail where
we can also see on his exposed leg and
foot a yellow and green striped stocking
or sock if you look closely at the
lantern he's holding it appears to
contain a horse inside and in the
background behind him we're presented
with another horse frozen in ice a horse
is not an unusual sight in Carrington's
paintings often she Incorporated a white
horse into her compositions as a
surrogate for herself but again
carington leaves the context of the
horses in this painting deliberately
ambiguous perhaps a horse could be
guiding ANS forward acting as a
protective guardian or given the fact
that both horses one locked in a glass
Lantern and the other in tuned in ice
could be a representation of
Carrington's desire to break free as has
been documented that their relationship
was at times wild and unpredictable with
erst often playing the role of a
dominating artistic Mentor as well as
her lover someone who Carrington felt
utterly dependent on on perhaps this
symbolism of that desire to break free
could be a hint of her wanting to escape
that Dynamic of emotional and artistic
control according to an article by the
Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art
where this painting currently resides
quote the painting captures some of the
ambivalence in their relationship at the
time the outbreak of a second world war
effectively brought their relationship
to an end and who was German was
imprisoned first by the French as an
enemy alien and subsequently by the
Gusto carington fled France for Spain
where she was hospitalized having
experienced acute mental stress
eventually both escaped to New York
where they exchanged portraits of each
other with Carrington presenting this
work to earnst end
quote
this painting completed in 1946 is
called the kitchen Garden on the E
created during Caron's Time in Mexico
City the work reflects the artists
immersion in Rich folklore spirituality
and mythology that became a predominant
focus in many of her works from this
period onwards the painting's central
Focus that the painting is named after
this time is actually in the background
where we can see the walled kitchen
Garden where fruits vegetables and herbs
are grown Caron who was pregnant with
her son at the time of painting this
uses this Garden as a metaphor for
procreation the strange tree with a
ghostly figure emerging from it on the
right can be seen holding an egg a
mystical symbol of fertility that draws
us into this Garden as a space of
biological and artistic conception if
you look around for long enough in this
painting you'll in fact notice other
examples of these egg symbolisms like a
bird that layes eggs in the hedge of a
kitchen Garden which even in itself kind
of looks like the shape of an egg
according to the San Francisco Museum of
Modern Art quote the many eggs in the
kitchen Garden on the eight guide the
viewer into this Garden the white figure
points to the garden with her foot the
orange figure points with its raised
hand and the bird gestures towards the
central opening with its wing suddenly
what previously appeared as an empty
space is full of symbolic vibration
Carrington also superimposes two other
symbols onto this area to multiply its
significance the ward Garden an emblem
of a female body and the six-pointed
star here represented by the six paths
that converge at the center which
signifies I the Supreme balance of
elements required an act of
transformation The Garden therefore
brings together fertility and creativity
at a moment when the artist embodied
both end
quote to add another Well egg fact I
guess we'll call it Caron also adopted
the egg tempera medium used in much
early Christian iconography which is
perhaps why this painting seems to
radiate a lot of similarities to that of
a herous b
painting there are other symbolic
figures that can be seen such as a horn
figure in red robes resembling the
Celtic God cunos who mingles with fellow
Spirits this again could be a call back
to C's upbringing in northern England
during the
1920s where at times she was steeped in
Celtic myths told by her nanny and her
Irish
grandmother as carington later recalled
quote I had very strange experiences
with all kinds of ghosts and visions and
things end quote in many ways it seems
her paintings offered a sanctu for these
Supernatural fantasies and personal
experiences to come to life when
carington found her new home in Mexico
during the time she painted this she
found other surrealists who encouraged
her interests in the spiritual and more
mystical side of life including the
painter redius faroh and the
photographer ktie Herer
together they experimented with Alchemy
and explored many
mythologies in fact the three figures on
the left could be interpreted as
Carrington varo and haer convening in
their spiritual Sanctuary whilst the
orange figure on the right sprinkles a
substance that recalls the spellcasting
powders that they purchased in Mexican
markets not only does this kitchen
Garden on the eight stand as a testament
to Leonor Carrington's unique and
Visionary artistic style but it also
subtly celebrates women and their bodies
as agents of creating life a celebration
sadly at odds with the prevailing
Tendencies of
surrealists as Caron explains quote the
women surrealists were considered
secondary to the male surrealists they
only wanted to entertain them as Muses
mad or
sensuous end quote however here
Carrington inverts this role her garden
is Walled off from the external
influences as an independent space of
creative action also the fact that this
Garden as the title suggests is on inate
meaning an island on a river supports
this Theory twofold as a world that's
entirely her own one that's protected
isolated safe and
harmonious
Carrington's the giantis or the guardian
of the egg completed in
1947 is a striking and enigmatic
painting that reflects the artist's
fascination with the subconscious her
dreams and the Fantastical as well as
being one of Caron's most famous
paintings the painting features a
colossal female figure the gianti who is
both formidable and ethereal with an
elongated body and a commanding presence
she wears a red dress beneath a white
Cape through the opening of her Cape are
depictions of strange bird-headed people
and a three-headed bird in a register of
scenes on the front of a dress her eyes
gazing over the strange landscape and
animals around her captures a viewer's
attention suggesting a sense of power
and
watchfulness the Egg which serves as a
central Motif is cradled in a giantess's
hands similar to the kitchen Garden it
is often considered to be symbolizing
fertility creation and the potential for
New
Beginnings behind her appears to be a
vast ocean of creatures in activity
which beautifully blends with the sky of
dark clouds above and clashes with
Carrington's use of muted and earthy
tones for the ground below enhancing the
dreamlike quality of the scene creating
a mood that is both haunting and
enchanting
one interpretation of a giantest
revolves around the theme of feminine
power and the nurturing aspect of
creation the giantes as the guardian of
the egg embodies the Primal force of
creation and the cyclical nature of Life
the egg a potent symbol in many cultures
can represent birth transformation and
the potential for
regeneration but there is also another
interesting take from yag motif used so
often in her art but I've not yet
mentioned which can be Unearthed from
Caron's book called down below that
recalls her memoirs from a time spent in
a mental institution in Spain during the
year of
1940 as carington describes quote this
morning the idea of the egg came into my
mind and I thought that I could use it
as a crystal to look at Madrid in those
days of July and August
1940 for why should it not enclose my
own experiences as well as the past and
future history of the
universe the egg is a macrocosm and the
microcosm the dividing line between the
big and small which makes it impossible
to see the whole end
quote the surrealist movement often
sought to explore the unconscious mind
and the giantest is no exception the
painting can be seen as a visual
manifestation of Cs exploration of her
own psyche and a collective Human
Experience the giantes May symbolize the
artist in herself acting as a guardian
and protector of the creative spark
within her as we already know Caron was
heavily influenced by mythology and
folklore the giantes in the painting
could be seen as a mythical figure
reminiscent of an ancient goddess or
primordial being associated with
creation and the mysteries of life
life the surrealistic elements in the
composition amplify the dreamlike
quality inviting viewers to contemplate
the symbolic meanings behind the imagery
it is a truly captivating work that
invites viewers to delve into the Realms
of a subconscious and the
mystical through its mysterious
symbolism dreamlike atmosphere an
exploration of femininity and creation
the painting stands as a testament to
Carrington's artistic vision and a
contribution to the rich tapestry of
surrealist
art finally I'd like to explore with you
one of her Works she created towards the
tail end of her career titled bird bath
completed in
1974 this period of her life is when
Carrington began to add portrayals of
older women to her visual vocabulary of
repeated settings and figures such as
these two elderly female figures dressed
all in black as carington herself
dressed in her older age who appear to
be spraying white paint onto a red
duck-like
bird in the background The Familiar
structure in the distance recalls her
childhood home crookie Hall which was
decorated with ornamental bird
motifs according to theartstory.org the
you use of a large Basin of water and a
clean white cloth held by the M
assistant records the Christian
sacrament of baptism and turning the
bird white May allude to the symbolic
Dove of the Holy Spirit however the
ceremony enacted by these characters
seems humorous as well as solemn much
like Carrington at this stage in her
life the woman in the scene have
undergone their own transformation from
young to old while retaining creative
power
it's also believed once again that The
Surreal ritual on display is another
call back to Caron's descriptions of her
experiences in the Spanish mental Asylum
of
1940 there is something unpleasantly
destructive in the nature of these two
figures in the foreground as if they've
taken the bird against its will and
subjected it to their own devices
removing its original color of red a
color that's often used in art to
symbolize passion pass and energy to be
replaced by something blank colorless
and plain such as white although this is
just a personal Theory it's possible
this could represent the suppression of
Carrington's creativity and her sense of
identity during her time of
hospitalization it's likely many workers
at the institution saw her vivid
imagination as a detriment rather than a
place of Solace for a mental health
perhaps even something demonic something
something that was seen to be removed or
replaced instead of
encouraged like I said this is just a
personal Theory but that's what I tend
to love the most about Leonora
Carrington's artwork although she has
written about her life plenty of times
when it comes to our paintings she shows
much but explains very little leaving it
to us the viewers to come to our own
conclusions and put the pieces together
ourselves as well as being a resiliant
female icon within the surrealist art
movement that for a while was largely
male-dominated Caron's unconventional
life artistic talent and rebellious
Spirits have left an indelible mark on
the art World Caron's ability to
seamlessly blend reality with fantasy
drawing from mythology folklore and
personal experiences showcases her
unique vision and contribution to
surrealist art when exploring her work
it becomes evident that Caron's art
transcends time continuing to Captivate
Inspire and challenge conventional Norms
beckoning us not to be afraid of our
sometimes overactive imaginations but
instead to embrace them like a lifelong
friend proving that the mind at times
can be a terrible ruler over us but when
used for creativity it can be a truly
wonderful
Ally
thank you to Squarespace for sponsoring
today's video we are so close to
kickstarting the new year now but now
that a new beginning is near it's time
to give ourselves some new goals such as
trying out a new medium checking out an
exhibition of an artist we've not heard
of before or if you're an artist how
about making a website for your art
because Squarespace makes it super easy
for beginners like you and me from the
GetGo you can choose from an endless
catalog of templates so you can easily
tweak and edit to fit your own style
whether your theme is bright and
colorful or dark and Moody Squarespace
has you covered to meet your aesthetic
on top of that the website building
system is so simple and intuitive with
their fluid engine technology when
editing your template and layouts you
can customize every design detail with
reimagined drag and drop technology for
desktop or mobile and when it comes to
showing off your artwork using
squarespace's professional portfolio
design designs allows you to display
your Creations in the most professional
way possible in customizable galleries
that can even include passw protected
pages to share private work with clients
so if you want to take the next step
with your art career and create a new
online home for your art I highly
recommend getting started with
Squarespace and taking full advantage of
the offer they're giving just for you
guys just click the link in my
description below and use the code on
screen to get 10% off your first
purchase
and start your online presence in the
best way
possible thank you again to Squarespace
for sponsoring today's video and of
course thank you to you for watching I
hope you found it interesting and if you
have any theories of your own for
Leonora Carrington's artwork in this
video or if you want to point out
anything I might have missed please let
me know in the comments below before I
go it's time for me to share some
artwork sent in by one of my viewers for
my end of video segment artist corner
and today's featured artist who I
thought would be very appropriate for
today's video is Tino
Rodriguez Tino tells me his work is
inspired by dreams and their mysterious
messages as he describes them he's also
fascinated in World mythology fairy tals
poetry and music sometimes his artwork
can even be inspired by the name of a
song for example a song by the cocko
twins titled how to bring a blush to the
snow was the inspiration behind his
imagery of the snow goddesses Tino tells
me he's also inspired by cave paintings
and illuminated manuscripts and of
course surrealism especially by artists
like redos faroh and as you might have
guessed Leonora Carrington and I have to
say when looking for his work Tino's
style shares very similar qualities to
both of these artists but he also says
he adores Rene mcgr and Max earnst as
well another thing that inspires Tino's
art is traveling and languages he tells
me he speaks three languages and loves
literature from many different cultures
he's also in love with nature and
animals particularly insects and flowers
for their potential for
symbolism which leads us to his unique
and eye-catching skull paintings Tino
says his skull series is inspired by his
Mexican heritage as well as a sacred
ritual and celebration of death from
growing up eating sugar skulls with his
name engraved on them led him to not
have a fear of death but more of a
Fascination in it quote it's a mystery
what happens after death but definitely
not scary or sad maybe melancholic but
never sad also of course these skulls
are very inspired by the 16th Century
painter archin Baldo all my work is
painted by hand and I use oils water
colors and gouache end quote I think
Tino's work is not only Beauty
beautifully detailed and elaborate but
also extremely thought-provoking the
kind of mind-bending imagery he presents
is so magnetic and hypnotizing just as
surreal art should be I can't help but
get lost in the colors and creatures he
designs making it a joy to spot the
symbolisms and metaphors hidden
throughout each piece his skull Series
in particular is very intriguing and so
clever how he uses the shapes of
different animals and objects to
transform them into different sections
of the sky that takes a particularly
Keen Eye and vivid imagination to pull
off if you could spare yourself a few
minutes to get lost in his artwork for
yourself sometime I seriously couldn't
recommend him enough please head over to
his Instagram page via the link you see
on screen or click the link in the below
description if you too are an artist and
would like a chance to maybe feature on
my channel someday I'd love to meet you
please email me your artwork and a bit
about yourself to Blind dweller
gmail.com or feel free to reach out to
me on
Instagram finally as always a huge
NeverEnding thank you to all of my
patrons and channel members here's a
special shout out to all of my top tier
donors within the dweller family miles
Zang grape who are both new patrons so a
big welcome to you too Vlad Sif Tyler
Butler Harley Raven Eric lamara Dave MC
molale e watermar Lea flowers Calvin Kai
the new on 24 a Kaiser large fatty or
big Chad Charlie San cheesy P Pera Ken B
and Carol
H that's all for me today then my
friends hope you all had a lovely
Christmas and here's to an amazing New
Year keeping creative bye for
now